.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007,2008,2009,2010 Mij <mij@sshguard.net>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd Mar 31, 2010
.Dt SSHGUARD 8
.Sh NAME
.Nm sshguard
.Nd monitors daemon activity 
.\"
.\"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl b Ar thr:filename
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl l Ar source
.Op Fl a Ar sAfety_thresh
.Op Fl p Ar pardon_min_interval
.Op Fl s Ar preScribe_interval
.Op Fl w Ar addr/host/block/file
.Op Fl f Ar srv:pidfile
.\"
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
monitors logging activity and reacts to attacks by blocking their source addresses.
.Pp
.Nm
was born for protecting SSH servers from the today's widespread brute force
attacks, and evolved to an extensible log supervisor for blocking attacks to
applications in real-time.
.Pp
.Nm
can monitor a number of log sources proactively, or receive log messages in
its standard input. By means of a parser, it decides whether an entry is
normal activity or attack; in the latter case, it remarks the attacker's
address. When
.Nm
determines that an attacker committed enough danger to the system to discern
an
.Ar abuse ,
it blocks the attacker's address with the firewall. The attacker becomes offender,
and is released after an adequate period of time.
.Pp
.Nm
supports the following firewalls:
.Bl -tag -width
.It AIX native firewall
for IBM AIX operating systems
.It netfilter/iptables
for Linux-based operating systems
.It Packet Filter (PF)
for BSD operating systems (Open, Free, Net, DragonFly -BSD)
.It IPFirewall (IPFW)
for FreeBSD and Mac OS X
.It IP Filter (IPFILTER)
for FreeBSD, NetBSD and Solaris
.It tcpd's hosts_access (/etc/hosts.allow)
portable across UNIX
.It null
portable do-nothing backend for running detection without prevention
.El
.Pp
Some terms in this manual have a special meaning in the context.
.Nm
refers to them consistently throughout documentation, source code, and log
messages. See
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/docs/terminology/
to get acquainted with them.
.\"
.\"
.Sh USAGE
.Nm
reads log entries to analyze by monitoring a number of log sources. It can
interpret logs with all of the following formats:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
syslog
.It
syslog-ng
.It
metalog
.It
multilog
.It
raw messages
.El
.Pp
.Nm
can interface with the following blocking systems to block attackers:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
IBM AIX firewall
.It
PF
.It
netfilter/iptables
.It
IPFW
.It
IP Filter
.It
/etc/hosts.allow
.It
null firewall
.El
.Pp
Depending on the way chosen for giving logs to sshguard, and depending on the
chosen blocking system, some setup may be needed. Instructions are documented
at
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/docs/setup/ .
.Pp
.Nm
does not make use of any configuration file. Instead, a combination of optional
arguments can be passed to its process on the command line, for modifying its
default behaviour:
.Bl -tag -width -indent
.It Fl b Ar [thresh:]filename
enable blacklisting: blacklist after
.Ar thresh
(or 40) dangerousness committed, and hold the permanent blacklist in
.Ar filename .
See TOUCHINESS & BLACKLISTING below.
.It Fl v
print summary information on sshguard and exit.
.It Fl l Ar source
enable the Log Sucker, and add
.Ar source
to the list of log sources to monitor.
.Ar source
is a filename, a FIFO name, or the magic symbol "-" to identify sshguard's
standard input.
.Nm
handles autonomously file-like sources disappearing, reappearing, or
"rotating". This option can be used multiple times. When omitted,
.Ar source
defaults to standard input. Otherwise, standard input is ignored unless
explicitly added.
.It Fl a Ar sAfety_thresh
block an attacker after it incurred a total dangerousness exceeding
.Ar sAfety_thresh .
Most attacks incur dangerousness 10. See
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/docs/reference/attack-signatures/
for details.
(Default: 40)
.It Fl p Ar secs
release a blocked address no sooner than
.Ar secs
seconds after being blocked for the first time.
.Nm
will release the address between X and 3/2 * X seconds after blocking it.
(Default: 7*60)
.It Fl s Ar secs
forget about an address after
.Ar secs
seconds. If host A issues one attack every this many seconds, it will never be
blocked.
(Default: 20*60)
.It Fl w Ar addr/host/block/file
see the WHITELISTING section.
.It Fl f Ar servicecode:pidfile
see the LOG VALIDATION section.
.El
.Pp
When
.Nm
is signalled with SIGTSTP, it suspends activity. When
.Nm
is signalled with SIGCONT, it resumes monitoring. During suspension, log
entries are discarded without being analyzed.
.Pp
When
.Nm
senses the SSHGUARD_DEBUG environment variable, it enables debugging mode: 
logging is directed to standard error instead of syslog, and includes
comprehensive details of the activity and parsing process. Debugging mode can
help investigating attack signatures: once enabled, a log message can be
directly pasted into the tool from the console, and the behavior is
immediately and minutely shown beneath.
.\"
.\"
.Sh WHITELISTING
.Nm
supports address whitelisting. Whitelisted addresses are not blocked even if
they appear to generate attacks. This is useful for protecting lame LAN users
(or external friendly users) from being incidentally blocked.
.Pp
Whitelist addresses are controlled through the
.Fl w
command-line option. This option can add explicit addresses, host names and
address blocks:
.Bl -tag -width
.It addresses
specify the numeric IPv4 or IPv6 address directly, like:
.Dl -w 192.168.1.10
or in multiple occurrences:
.Dl -w 192.168.1.10 -w 2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334
.It host names
specify the host name directly, like:
.Dl -w friendhost.enterprise.com
or in multiple occurrences:
.Dl -w friendhost.enterprise.com -w friend2.enterprise.com
All IPv4 and IPv6 addresses that the host resolves to are whitelisted. Hosts
are resolved to addresses once, when sshguard starts up.
.It address blocks
specify the IPv4 or IPv6 address block in the usual CIDR notation:
.Dl -w 2002:836b:4179::836b:0000/126
or in multiple occurrences:
.Dl -w 192.168.0.0/24 -w 1.2.3.128/26
.It file
When longer lists are needed for whitelisting, they can be wrapped into a plain
text file, one address/hostname/block per line, with the same syntax given
above.
.Pp
.Nm
can take whitelists from files when the
.Fl w
option argument begins with a `.' (dot) or `/' (slash).
.Pp
This is a sample whitelist file (say /etc/friends):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# comment line (a '#' as very first character)
#   a single IPv4 and IPv6 address
1.2.3.4
2001:0db8:85a3:08d3:1319:8a2e:0370:7344
#   address blocks in CIDR notation
127.0.0.0/8
10.11.128.0/17
192.168.0.0/24
2002:836b:4179::836b:0000/126
#   hostnames
rome-fw.enterprise.com
hosts.friends.com
.Ed
.Pp
And this is how
.Nm
is told to make a whitelist up from the /etc/friends file:
.Dl sshguard -w /etc/friends
.El
.Pp
The
.Fl w
option can be used only once for files. For addresses, host names and address blocks
it can be used with any multiplicity, even with mixes of them.
.\"
.\"
.Sh LOG VALIDATION
Syslog and syslog-ng typically insert a PID of the generating process in every
log message. This can be checked for authenticating the source of the message and
avoid false attacks to be detected because malicious local users inject crafted
log messages. This way
.Nm
can be safely used even on hosts where this assumption does not hold.
.Pp
Log validation is only needed when
.Nm
is fed log messages from syslog or from syslog-ng. When a process logs directly
to a raw file and sshguard is configured for polling logs directly from it,
you only need to adjust the log file permissions so that only root can write
on it.
.Pp
For enabling log validation on a given service the
.Fl f
option is used as follows:
.Dl -f 100:/var/run/sshd.pid
which associates the given pidfile to the ssh service (code 100). A list of well-known
service codes is available at
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/docs/reference/service-codes/ .
.Pp
The
.Fl f
option can be used multiple times for associating different services with their pidfile:
.Dl sshguard -f 100:/var/run/sshd.pid -f 123:/var/run/mydaemon.pid
.Pp
Services that are not configured for log validation follow a default-allow
policy (all of their log messages are accepted by default).
.Pp
PIDs are checked with the following policy:
.Bl -enum -width
.It
the logging service is searched in the list of services configured for
validation. If not found, the entry is accepted.
.It
the logged PID is compared with the pidfile. If it matches, the entry is accepted
.It
the PID is checked for being a direct child of the authoritative process. If it
is, the entry is accepted.
.It
the entry is ignored.
.El
Low I/O load is committed to the operating system because of an internal caching
mechanism. Changes in the pidfile value are handled transparently.
.\"
.\"
.Sh TOUCHINESS & BLACKLISTING
In many cases, attacks against services are performed in bulk in an automated
form. For example, the attacker goes trough a dictionary of 1500
username/password pairs and sequentially tries to violate the SSH service with
any of them, continuing blindly while blocked, and re-appearing once the block
expires.
.Pp
To counteract these cases,
.Nm
by default behaves with
.Ar touchiness .
Besides observing abuses from the log activity, it also monitors the overall
behavior of attackers. The decision on when and how to block is thus made
respective to the entire history of the offender as well. For example, if
address A attacks repeatedly and the base blocking time is 420 seconds, A will
be blocked for 420 seconds (7 mins) at the first abuse, 2*420 (14 mins) the
second, 2*2*420 (28 mins) the third ... and 2^(n-1)*420 the n-th time.
.Pp
Touchiness has two major benefits: to legitimate users, it grants forgiving
blockings on failed logins; to real attackers, it effectively renders
large scale attacks infeasible, because the time to perform one explodes with
the number of attempts.
.Pp
Touchiness can be augmented with
.Ar blacklisting
(-b). With this option, after a certain total danger committed, the address is
added to a list of offenders to be blocked permanently. The list is intended to
be loaded at each startup, and maintained/extended with new entries during
operation.
.Nm
inserts a new address after it exceeded a threshold of danger committed over
recorded history. This threshold is configurable within the 
.Fl b
option argument. Blacklisted addresses are never scheduled for releasing.
.Pp
The
.Fl b
command line option enables blacklisting and requires the filename to use
for permanent storage of the blacklist. Optionally, a custom blacklist
threshold can be prefixed to this path, separated by ':'. For example,
.Dl -b 50:/var/db/sshguard/blacklist.db
requires to blacklist addresses after having committed attacks for danger 50
(default per-attack danger is 10), and store the blacklist in file
/var/db/sshguard/blacklist.db. Although the blacklist file is not meant to be
in human-readable format, the
.Xr strings 1
command can be used to peek in it for listing the blacklisted addresses.
.\"
.\"
.Sh EXTENSIONS
.Nm
operates firewalls through a general interface, which enables easy extension,
and allows back-ends to be non-local (e.g. remote appliances), and non-blocking
(e.g. report tools). Additions can be suggested at
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/feedback/firewall/submit/ .
.Pp
Extending attack signatures needs some expertise with context-free parsers;
users are welcome to submit samples of the desired log messages to
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/support/attacks/submit/ .
.\"
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr syslog 1 ,
.Xr syslog.conf 5
.Pp
.Nm
website at:
.Ar http://www.sshguard.net/
